---
title: "The BrightEyes-TTM: an Open-Source Time-Tagging Module for Single-Photon Microscopy"
collection: publications
date: 2021-10-11
venue: 'bioRxiv'
volume: 
issue: 
pages: 
authors: 'Alessandro Rossetta, Eli Slenders, Mattia Donato, Eleonora Perego, Francesco Diotalevi, Luca Lanzano', Sami V Koho, Giorgio Tortarolo, Marco Crepaldi, Giuseppe Vicidomini'
paperurl: https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2021.10.11.463950v1
doi: 10.1101/2021.10.11.463950
tagline: '- Paper, Corresponding author'
type: "BrightEyes, Time Tagging"
---

<h2> Abstract </h2>
<p align= "justify">
Fluorescence laser-scanning microscopy (LSM) is experiencing a revolution thanks to the introduction of new asynchronous read-out single-photon (SP) array detectors. These detectors give access to an entirely new set of single-photon information typically lost in conventional fluorescence LSM, thus triggering a new imaging/spectroscopy paradigm - the so-called single-photon LSM (SP-LSM). The revolution's outcomes are, from one side, the blooming of new SP-LSM techniques and tailored SP array detectors; from the other side, the need for data-acquisition (DAQ) systems effectively supporting such innovations. In particular, there is a growing need for DAQ systems capable of handling the high throughput and high temporal reso- lution information generated by the single-photon detectors. To fill this gap, we developed an open-source multi-channel time-tagging module (TTM) based on a field-programmable-gate-array (FPGA), that can temporally tag single-photon events - with 30 ps precision - and synchronisation events - with 4 ns precision. Furthermore, being an open-access project, the TTM can be upgraded, modified, and customized by the microscopy-makers. We connected the TTM to a fluorescence LSM equipped with a single-photon avalanche diode (SPAD) bidimensional array detector, and we implemented fluorescence lifetime image scanning microscopy (FLISM) and, for the first time, fluorescence lifetime fluctuation spectroscopy (FLFS). We expect that our BrigthEyes-TTM will support the microscopy community to spread SP-LSM in many life science labs.
